Libertine documentation language reworked (#408)
ubports/docs.ubports.com: userguide/dailyuse/libertine.rst

Libertine allows you to use standard desktop applications in Ubuntu Touch.

> To install apps you may use the *Settings* interface on your Ubuntu Touch device, or you may use the command-line as described further below.

Author: ```suggestion
To install applications you can use the *Settings* interface on your Ubuntu Touch device, or the command-line as described further below.
```

Manage containers
-----------------

Create a container
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first step is to create a container where apps can be installed:

Open Settings and scroll down to *Libertine* under the *System* sub-heading.

Tap *Libertine* to get to the *Manage Libertine Containers* sub-menu.
Already installed containers will be visible here.
Tap the + sign at the upper right to add a container.

The *Container Options* dialog box will open asking you to enter a container name and optionally a password.
Confirm your entries by tapping "OK", and the container will be created.

To do this via the command-line::

  libertine-container-manager create -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER

You can add extra options such as:

 * ``-n name`` name is a more user-friendly name of the container
 * ``-t type`` type can be either ``chroot`` or ``lxc``. The default is ``chroot`` , which is compatible with every device.
 If the kernel of your device supports it, ``lxc`` is suggested.

Creation can take a while due to the size of the container (some hundred megabytes).

.. note::
    The ``create`` command shown above cannot be run directly in the terminal app, due to AppArmor restrictions.

>     You can run it from another device using either ``adb`,` or an ``SSH`` connection.

Author: ```suggestion
    You can run it from another device using either an ADB or SSH connection.
```

>     You can run it from another device using either ``adb`,` or an ``SSH`` connection.

Author: Don't know what I was thinking here.

Libertine allows you to use standard desktop applications in Ubuntu Touch.

To install applications you can use the *Settings* interface on your Ubuntu Touch device, or the command-line as described further below.

Manage containers
-----------------

Create a container
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The first step is to create a container where apps can be installed:

Author: ```suggestion
The first step is to create a container where applications can be installed:
```

Manage applications
-------------------

Once a container is set up, the installed apps are available in the app drawer.
You can also tap the name of the container in the *Manage Libertine Containers* menu.

You can also list them via the command-line::

  libertine-container-manager list-apps

Install a package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

From the apps list in the *Manage Libertine Containers* menu you can tap the + sign to get a dialog box that lets you add a package.

Enter the package name if you know it.
Otherwise you can search the archives for a package.
You can make this process easier by making the *Lubuntu Software Center* your first package install.

> Being a desktop app, you will need to use the *Libertine Tweak Tool* in the *Open Store* to make the text large enough to read on a mobile device.

Author: ```suggestion
Being a desktop application, you will need to use the *Libertine Tweak Tool* in the *Open Store* to make the text large enough to read on a mobile device.
```

Packages may also be installed via the command-line::

  libertine-container-manager install-package -p PACKAGE-NAME

Remove a package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> On the package list, within the container (*System Settings* > *Libertine* > *Manage Libertine Containers* > *CONTAINER NAME*), swipe right on the package you want to remove to reveal the option to remove it.

Author: ```suggestion
Remove a package by swiping it to the right from its entry in the package list (in *System Settings* > *Libertine* > *Manage Libertine Containers* > *CONTAINER NAME*). An option to remove it will be revealed.
```

Manage applications
-------------------

> Once a container is set up, the installed apps are available in the app drawer.

Author: ```suggestion
Once a container is set up, the installed applications are available in the app drawer.
```

You can also tap the name of the container in the *Manage Libertine Containers* menu.

You can also list them via the command-line::

  libertine-container-manager list-apps

Install a package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

From the apps list in the *Manage Libertine Containers* menu you can tap the + sign to get a dialog box that lets you add a package.

Enter the package name if you know it.
Otherwise you can search the archives for a package.
You can make this process easier by making the *Lubuntu Software Center* your first package install.

> Being a desktop application, you will need to use the *Libertine Tweak Tool* in the *Open Store* to make the text large enough to read on a mobile device.

Author: ```suggestion
Being a desktop app, you will need to use the *Libertine Tweak Tool* in the *Open Store* to make the text large enough to read on a mobile device.
```

Packages may also be installed via the command-line::

  libertine-container-manager install-package -p PACKAGE-NAME

Remove a package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Remove a package by swiping it to the right from its entry in the package list (in *System Settings* > *Libertine* > *Manage Libertine Containers* > *CONTAINER NAME*). An option to remove it will be revealed.

Or you can remove the package via the command-line::

  libertine-container-manager remove-package -p PACKAGE-NAME

.. note::
    If you have more than one container, you can use the option ``-i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER`` to specify which container you want to perform an operation on.

Run desktop application
-----------------------

Run it from the app menu like any other app. To start a graphical app from the command-line, for example ``gedit``, run this in a terminal::

  # ubuntu-app-launch <CONTAINER_ID>_<desktop_file_name>_0.0
  ubuntu-app-launch xenial_gedit_0.0

Files
-----

> Libertine apps have access to these folders:

Author: ```suggestion
Libertine applications have access to these folders:
```

  
This will not give the container access to any of the directories earlier in the path for anything other than accessing your mounted directory.
    
In order to use the SD card as extra space for your container, make sure to first format it using ext4 or similar.
There is a mis-feature in UDisks2 that mounts SD-cards (showexec), ensuring only files ending in .bat, .exe or .com can be executed from the drive if it is (V)FAT formatted.
This has been changed in other distributions, allowing any file to have execute priviliges, but not in Ubuntu.
The recommended workaround is to add a udev rule to control how to mount a card with a given ID, but since the udev rules are on the read-only port on Ubuntu Touch, this is not possible.

Shortcuts
^^^^^^^^^

If you want, you can add aliases for command-line tools.
Add lines like the following ones to your ``~/.bash_aliases``::

    alias git='libertine-launch -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER git'
    alias screenfetch='libertine-launch -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER screenfetch'

Background
----------

A display server coordinates input and output of an operating system.

> Most Linux|GNU distributions today use the X server.

Reviewer: sigh. really? are we going down that rabbit hole? oookay, I'm not opposed to giving credit. I guess we can do the gnu linux thing. I just hope it doesn't mess with the readability too much. 

But then let's stick to typical formulation. I am used to see "GNU/Linux" or "GNU Linux", I have never seen "Linux|GNU". Let's stick to "standard" way that will disturb the reading flow as little as possible. 

On a different note - the claim that most distros use X is slowly becoming untrue. Maybe not fully yet, but we could simply remove the sentence. It is irrelevant for the explanation of Libertine whether or not other distros use X or not

Author: Linux piped into GNU makes more sense to me. Also the ordering is nice that way. GNU/+ is used by the FSF in some self of self-crediting way. Removing.

Reviewer: Mhm. I'm still not convinced. Frankly, whether the *form* of the expression "makes sense" is *to me* a non-issue. The particular *content* doesn't make sense to me. Yes, what people normally call Linux is much more than just the Kernel. But it is also more than the Linux kernel and the GNU system. Yes, Linux + GNU can be called an "Operating System", but, so what. Almost nobody uses a bare OS, without graphics, without network management, without systemd, without a browser, etc, etc. So, the only thing that's left for me here is to say: using the expression GNU/Linux can serve as a symbol for "all those fabulous Free and Open Source Software projects that together give me this well rounded system". And on this symbolic level I really don't see the point in coming up with a new style to express the combination of GNU and Linux, even if for some specific case it might "make more sense". For the symbolic use, I really want to use that same formulation that everybody else uses.

Author: What normally happens and what you can conflate it into based on derived assumptions of what it is is not my gripe.
To make the distinction from for example vendor Android Linux, you need some moniker to forward user freedom.
This is important from toybox onwards, even if that has no "GNU" components.
It doesn't undermine Linux to use it this way, because the Linux kernel is neutral.

Precisely by not going with the force-fed convention here, it makes people think.

There are plenty more embedded distributions of "linux" that aren't "Linux|GNU" in this way, and they don't use the Xorg.

> Most Linux|GNU distributions today use the X server.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Ubuntu Touch does not use X, but a new display server called Mir.

> This means standard X apps are not directly compatible with Ubuntu Touch.

Reviewer: applications

Author: programs programs programs

Reviewer: I don't understand. Are you suggesting to use the word "programs" instead of "applications"/"apps". Fine with me. 

Either way, right now I count the words
* "application" 7 times, and 
* "apps" 7 times 
when referring to Libertine applications

Please use one of "program" or "application" in all 14 cases.

Author: Didn't I get shut down on calling it "programs"?
My rationale is that there is no distinction between (mobile) app, and (desktop) program anymore.
Light programs on desktop are widgets, and that seems to have made its way onto mobile platforms too, so "apps" only has this possible mismatch.

I seemingly only changed more of the "application" ones to "app".

Reviewer: > Didn't I get shut down on calling it "programs"? 

oh, did I. Can't remember. It's been a long PR. Sorry, for the back and forth then

> Pretty sure it isn't "programs" anywhere else.
> 
> My rationale is that there is no distinction between (mobile) app, and (desktop) program anymore.
> Light programs on desktop are widgets, and that seems to have made its way onto mobile platforms too, so "apps" only has this possible mismatch.
> 

Well, my rationale is that there is still a pretty significant distinction between mobile apps and desktop programs *when dealing with Libertine*. 

> I seemingly only changed more of the "application" ones to "app".
> 
> Small problem compared to the greater wealth of changes.
> 
> Edit: Seems like it is more often "applications" for desktop, and "apps" for mobile?

Yep. My idea when writing it and in this review was to use/keep these two words in these two contexts.

> This means standard X apps are not directly compatible with Ubuntu Touch.

Author: ```suggestion
This means standard X applications are not directly compatible with Ubuntu Touch.
```

.. note::
    When you launch Bash in this way you will not get any specific feedback to confirm being *inside* the container.
    You can check ``ls /`` to confirm for yourself you are actually inside the container.
    The listing of ``ls /`` will be different inside and outside the container.

Accessing SD card
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To access your SD-card or any other part of the regular filesystem from inside your Libertine container you must create a bind mount.

To add a bind mount, use::

  libertine-container-manager configure -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER -b add -p /media/phablet/ID-OF-SD
  
You can also make deep links if you only want parts of your SD-card available in the container.
In this case just add the entire path to the directory you want to bind mount::

  libertine-container-manager configure -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER -b add -p /media/phablet/ID-OF-SD/directory/you/want
  
This will not give the container access to any of the directories earlier in the path for anything other than accessing your mounted directory.
    
In order to use the SD card as extra space for your container, make sure to first format it using ext4 or similar.

> There is a mis-feature in UDisks2 that mounts SD-cards (showexec), ensuring only files ending in .bat, .exe or .com can be executed from the drive if it is (V)FAT formatted.

Author: Not 100% sure about UDisks2

Reviewer: lower case and with plural s https://packages.ubuntu.com/xenial/udisks2 https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/udisks/

Author: But then storaged.org/doc/udisks2-api/latest/ and https://github.com/storaged-project/udisks

Reviewer: True! 

Flip a coin :D

Author: I prefer the latter since the actual project uses it. However consistently, I don't know.

This has been changed in other distributions, allowing any file to have execute priviliges, but not in Ubuntu.
The recommended workaround is to add a udev rule to control how to mount a card with a given ID, but since the udev rules are on the read-only port on Ubuntu Touch, this is not possible.

Shortcuts
^^^^^^^^^

If you want, you can add aliases for command-line tools.
Add lines like the following ones to your ``~/.bash_aliases``::

    alias git='libertine-launch -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER git'
    alias screenfetch='libertine-launch -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER screenfetch'

Background
----------

A display server coordinates input and output of an operating system.
Most Linux|GNU distributions today use the X server.

> Ubuntu Touch does not use X, but  a new display server called Mir.

Author: ```suggestion
Ubuntu Touch does not use X, but a new display server called Mir.
```

> Ubuntu Touch does not use X, but  a new display server called Mir.

Author: Does it still?

Reviewer: yes

    
In order to use the SD card as extra space for your container, make sure to first format it using ext4 or similar.
There is a mis-feature in UDisks2 that mounts SD-cards (showexec), ensuring only files ending in .bat, .exe or .com can be executed from the drive if it is (V)FAT formatted.
This has been changed in other distributions, allowing any file to have execute priviliges, but not in Ubuntu.
The recommended workaround is to add a udev rule to control how to mount a card with a given ID, but since the udev rules are on the read-only port on Ubuntu Touch, this is not possible.

Shortcuts
^^^^^^^^^

If you want, you can add aliases for command-line tools.
Add lines like the following ones to your ``~/.bash_aliases``::

    alias git='libertine-launch -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER git'
    alias screenfetch='libertine-launch -i CONTAINER-IDENTIFIER screenfetch'

Background
----------

A display server coordinates input and output of an operating system.
Ubuntu Touch does not use X, but a new display server called Mir.
This means standard X applications are not directly compatible with Ubuntu Touch.
A compatibility layer called XMir resolves this.

> Libertine relies on XMir to display desktop apps.

Author: ```suggestion
Libertine relies on XMir to display desktop applications.
```

Another challenge is that Ubuntu Touch system updates are released as OTA images.
As a consequence of this the root filesystem is read-only.

> Libertine provides a container with a read-write filesystem to allow installation of regular Linux|GNU desktop apps.

Author: ```suggestion
Libertine provides a container with a read-write filesystem to allow installation of regular Linux|GNU desktop applications.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Libertine provides a container with a read-write filesystem to allow installation of regular Linux desktop apps.
```
